local decision-making and accessibility as well as banking products and services to Brazos Valley citizens.
[Music.]
Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Once you hear the story of College Station's Ken Loveless, you will say it's a miracle that he's here to tell us the story at all.
Colonel Loveless flew choppers in Vietnam, attacked helicopters, and he can count at least five times in his career that he's crashed, the first time he should not have survived.
A helicopter pilot for General Westmoreland and General Abrams in Vietnam.
His story of service is indeed an amazing one to hear.
And we welcome Colonel Ken Loveless to Veterans of the Valley.
It's a pleasure to have you here, Ken.
Thank you.
And thank you for your service, first off.
Let's go back early.
You were very young when you entered military service.
Matter of fact, you were in high school, actually, when you joined the 143rd Infantry Regiment.
Talk about growing up.
You grew up near Waco.
But you came to San Antonio when your dad was wounded in World War II.
Sort of talk about the early years.
The early years.
I grew up on a farm actually west of Amarillo, about 60 miles west, very close to the New Mexico-Texas line.
And while there during the war, during the Second World War, the Army Air Corps often would land at a
farmer's field about a mile, mile and a half from my grandparents' home.
I was being reared by my grandparents until I was, well through the farmative years until I was about six.
And watching the airplanes come in and land, the army had actually leased a bit of the property to the government
And this property was used in part of the training, navigation training, cross-country training for the Army Air Corps that I believe for the most part were based out of the Lubbock area.
Any chance I had, I would go down to the field where they landed.
I'd get my granddad to take me down or my grandmother.
And I would meet the pilots, and they would let me sit in the airplane and play with the instruments and whatever.
So I think that really started my sincere appreciation for aviation.
And then when I was about six years old, my sister and I left the farm and went to San Antonio, Texas to be with my mother and my dad in San Antonio again.
was nothing but aviation.
It was Kelly, Air Force Base, Randolph, Lackland Air Force Base.
So just about any time of the day, you could look up and see an airplane.
And I, in my mind, decided that would be a great thing to do.
And then when we left San Antonio to go to Waco, there was James Conley Air Force Base.
Again, aircraft in the air most of the day.
And there at Waco, I attended a university high school.
And while there, I worked actually half the day.
I went to school from 8 to 12.
Then I went to my job in downtown Waco at Hill Printing and Stationery Company at 1 o'clock.
And I'd work till 5 or 6.
And did that five days a week plus some Saturday mornings.
And when it was time for me to graduate from high school, I had no plans at all of going into the military at that time.
I really didn't know how.
I had joined the National Guard, as you mentioned, the 143rd Infantry Regiment, 36th Infantry Division, Texas National Guard.
So it gave me a little appreciation
I think I learned a lot, especially a lot about officers and non-coms and soldiers while being in the National Guard.
I actually, as I said, didn't intend at all to go into the military.
I was quite pleased with the National Guard, but I would stand there at my
printing press day after day, sweating.
It was so hot in there you couldn't.
We didn't have air conditioning in the printing shops.
And I was on the second floor.
I would look down and I would see same cars Monday through Friday going and coming from work.
And I would have to listen to the older men
in the shop always griping about if they had only stayed in the Navy, if they had only stayed in the Army.
You know, over and over, I would have been retired last year or I would be retiring this month if I had just stayed in the military.
Well, I was thinking about staying in the printing business and having to stand there and listen to that the rest of my life and see those same cars going to and from work that
Something in my mind told me I ought to get out of the printing business.
And I had a friend.
We were out driving around town one night.
He had gone to North Texas State and had made poor grades.
And so in those days, you had to lay out one semester before you could go back to school.
And while we were driving around one night,
He said, Ken, Sunday I'm going back up to North Texas, back up to Denton.
Why don't you come with me?
And I said, well, I don't know about that.
He said, well, you've got some money saved up.
Yeah, I've got some money saved up.
He said, well, come on and let's go.
Well, I took him up on it.
I went to Denton, knew nothing about the school, knew nothing about going to college, nor had I taken any of the prep high school
courses you're supposed to take. Nor had I taken any tests. I knew nothing about it, but I was there. So we went into a like a gymnasium and they had card tables all around the walls. Again you got to keep in mind there were no computers in those days. Everything was stubby pencil, you know, and I just got in line with everybody else. I had my checkbook. Just like I said, I
saved the money up from working through high school.
And I would sign up for classes that I thought I should sign up for.
And a few electives.
I got to the end of all the tables.
And that's where you paid your money.
So I wrote a check.
And that was all I went to class.
One semester went by.
I did very well.
I had gone into the Air Force ROTC there.
And one day during the first or the second semester, I had a note from the dean of men.
Report to him Saturday at whatever time.
I don't remember.
And I did.
I found out where his office was.
I came in and reported to him.
And he said, who are you?
I said, well, I'm Ken Loveless.
He said, I know that, but who are you?
How did you get here?
I said, well, I just got in a car and drove up here.
Well, how did you get in school?
I said, well, I stood in line, paid my money, and I was in.
Well, he said, you can't do that.
He said, you're going to have to take the courses necessary, and you'll do that next Saturday.
It'll take you about four hours to take the test, one's math and English and whatever.
Report to building so-and-so at 8 o'clock in the morning.
I did.
Took the test.
Went on about my business.
And to this day, I've never heard another word.
I think they had to fulfill a state requirement of some sort.
So I have no idea what grades I made or whatever.
And thank goodness it worked out because I couldn't work in Denton.
You had the North Texas State on one side of town, University of Texas for women on the other, and there were no jobs.
And I had to work.
And so an opportunity came for me to go to West Texas, to Canyon, Texas, West Texas State, where work was plentiful.
You wouldn't think so, being a small town of Canyon.
But Amarillo was 17 miles away, and there were many jobs there.
Plus, I knew how to run a printing press.
And as such, I got a job on the campus with the college press, running the press.
Whenever I wasn't in school, I could go work printing.
And then in the evenings, I pumped gas at the local Phillips 66 station.
You graduated from West Texas State.
I want to get you into the military here.
In 1961, you graduated from West Texas State and you got your commission after that and you went to Fort Benning for infantry officer basic course where you got your parachute rating at that time.
Sort of take us from there and let's get us into the military.
All right.
Okay.
Let's say we've been to Fort Benning.
Been to the, we call it the Benning School for Boys, the infantry basic course.
And then I had orders for airborne school.
followed by orders to go to the Army Helicopter School in Fort Walters, Texas at Brinnell Wells.
Brinnell Wells, right.
And while there, I actually really took to flying.
It was just second nature and I just thoroughly enjoyed it.
Every morning, and this was during the December, January time frame, every morning the students would take a number.
They'd bring the numbers, the tail boom numbers, the numbers of the aircraft, and put them on a chalkboard.
And then when they got to your name, that is the aircraft that was assigned to you.
And then you would go out from the building to the flight line to that aircraft.
Well, I went out that particular morning.
Me and one other person was.
waiting for our airplanes, for our helicopters.
I went to the helicopter.
It was absolutely beautiful, clean, immaculate.
I said, this is the best one I've seen.
Well, I got in, cranked it up, hovered out to the takeoff pad on the heliport, cleared the takeoff.
I took off, and we have in the helicopter business an area.
It's called Dead Bend's Curve.
That's between about 15 feet or so and 200 feet.
If you're on takeoff, pulling maximum power, you have no airspeed, yet you're climbing, if you have a complete engine failure within that perimeter, you're for sure going to tear the aircraft up because you can't get pitched down fast enough and get enough rotations on the blade
to pull in and come to a soft spot.
You just don't have enough altitude.
And as I was taking off in that particular dead man's curve, the engine just blew up.
It threw actually through two ride-in bearings.
So two pistons of the six were ruined.
The engine just exploded.
And I had time to level the skids and pick a spot which was right straight in front of me.
It was bearing no trees, but there was a highline cable wire that went through several of them.
And I had to get over those.
So as I approached them, this is all taking just moments.
All I had time to do was get the picture on the bottom.
I hollered May Day three times.
I remember that on the way down.
And then I had the perfect sight picture to cushion the aircraft and land.
And suddenly the aircraft tipped over and went straight in.
All I saw was brown.
And the accident board determined that on that particular helicopter there was a little, we called it the pogo stick, but it protected the
tail rotor from getting hit on the ground if you came in too steep.
Well, that pogo stick hit one of the wires and tipped the helicopter on its nose.
When it went in, it beat itself to death on the ground.
It ended up on the right side, and I ended up, when I released myself from the seat belt and the harness, I fell over to on the right side looking
straight up through the left door, and I said, well, I've got to gather my belongings.
I saw my wallet, and I went to try to pull myself out of the aircraft, and it had a big broken hole in the front of the aircraft, the bubble, and I was going to crawl out, pull myself out of that hole, but
With my legs up in the air over the console of the helicopter, and I'm on my back, and I go to try to move, and my legs from the waist down, I was paralyzed.
Couldn't feel a thing, couldn't do anything with it.
And about that time, I heard a crackling sound, followed momentarily by smoke.
And I knew then I had a full load of fuel on the helicopter.
I knew then what had happened.
And I knew I had to get out of there.
But I couldn't.
So after, might have been moments, but it seemed to me like an eternity, I was looking at the clear blue winter sky.
It was a cold day.
And suddenly I heard someone say, we've got to get out of here.
It's going to explode.
And I looked, and a man was crawling into the front of the helicopter.
He grabbed me by my shoulders, pulled me out of the helicopter.
And of course, I was dead weight.
I couldn't get on my feet.
So he tucked his head under my arm.
And we got out about 10 yards, and we both fell down.
And at that time, the helicopter did, in fact, burst into flames.
did a pretty good job on it.
It burned it up.
And it did.
My fear was further endorsed by having to be picked up by a helicopter and put in a litter that was strapped to the cross tubes of the helicopter, the landing gear of the helicopter.
They flew me to the hospital with me laying outside strapped to a litter.
looking straight up into the blades of another helicopter identical to the one that I had been flying.
That's how I got to the hospital.
But it did bum me up a little bit and set me back a couple of classes before I could get well enough.
There's some damage to my back and my left leg and my teeth.
I ate part of the helmet, I think, when we crashed.
But that was the end of that.
I did make it through it.
Went on to continue school in a later class.
Right.
After flight school, you had orders to Fort Bragg in your first duty as a lieutenant.
And talk a little bit about, this is before we were to Vietnam, and a situation where you had duty in Oxford, Mississippi.
Yes.
Go ahead, talk about that story.
In those days, in the 1962, three, four, we had...
quite a few problems across the country with, as you know, most places where there was in school and in lunch counters and all because of segregation, there were very tough times on the part of those people who were involved by that being the military,
being the civilians, being the city governments.
And one of those times had to do, that I got personally involved over, there was actually two of them, one in Greensboro, North Carolina, but this particular one was in Knoxville, Mississippi, where an ex-Air Force sergeant had enrolled at Ole Miss
And again, Ole Miss was segregated.
And things did not go well there for him, as you all might imagine.
There were federal marshals who were there to protect him, to accompany him to class and from class back to his living area.
And the Army was there to protect the federal marshals.
because there were problems with things being thrown at him and the federal marshals whenever he would try to move about on campus.
We had an aviation detachment there, and I was sent from Fort Bragg, for me, down to be the aviation officer.
I had several helicopters, several airplanes,
And my pilots lived on the airfield outside of Oxford.
And the rest of us guys, we lived over on a farmer's pig farm, actually.
It was called the USAFOX Command, United States Armed Forces, Oxford.
And that was quite an eye-opener for me.
I learned a lot.
It was a terrible assignment.
as far as that goes, but it was very educational.
It rained there, of course, all that time, and we had to live in tents.
We could not stay in motels or in buildings or hotels or anywhere.
We couldn't go into town.
You couldn't buy anything.
You couldn't get a haircut.
You couldn't do anything in town.
So we just kind of lived on our own out there, and all of our trash and all went to the pig farm, and he was happy.
But that was a real interesting time.
And I'll tell you something related to that.
When I went to leave Fayetteville, North Carolina to go to Oxford, there was an airline in those days called Piedmont.
And the aircraft went from Fayetteville to Memphis, Tennessee.
And then I was supposed to catch another flight from there down to Oxford.
And when I got on the airplane to leave, we had to always wear our uniform.
Any time in those days when the military traveled, and you weren't paying for it, in other words, you were supposed to be in uniform.
So I had on my uniform, and I sat down in the seat, and the airplane started to roll for taking off, and then suddenly the brakes went on, and it came to a stop.
And then over to the PA system, it says, is there a Lieutenant Loveless on board?
And I said, oh, my gosh.
You know, a stewardess came and got me.
And what happened is I'd run off with the car keys, and my wife couldn't get away from the airport.
Now, that would never happen today.
They wouldn't stop an airplane on takeoff for me to go up front and throw the keys out of the pilot's window.
But I've never forgot that.
It was really hilarious.
And, of course, the people on the airplane made me the butt of jokes after that.
I want to go to some photographs here real quick that you have supplied us from your home also that'll show some of your awards and everything.
You can see right there.
Talk about what that picture is.
I was the commander of the 162nd assault helicopter company.
We flew out of Kanto, South Vietnam.
And I'm standing there in front of one of the UH-1 Hueys.
We had different types of Hueys, really a different type just meant you had a better, bigger engine or some configured for guns, some configured for slicks, which were the type of helicopter that took the troops on combat assault.
And we parked them in revetments, those are sandbags with steel supporting them, and that's to protect them when the mortars, when we would get rockets or mortars in.
on the field.
And that's just an actual pose shot of me in front of my helicopter.
Okay, let's move on to the next one.
This is in your home.
These are some patches.
We can just say that from the top left to the bottom right, that sort of covers your career as far as the patches that you wore in the military from the Texas National Guard up at the top left
all the way to the bottom right.
Let's move on to the next photograph.
Highly decorated soldiers, some of the medals that Colonel Loveless won, the Silver Star, the Legion of Merit, the Distinguished Flying Cross with Oak Leaf Cluster, the Bronze Star with Oak Leaf Cluster, the Defense Meritorious Service Medal, Meritorious Service Medal with two Oak Leaf Clusters, Air Medal with 26 Oak Leaf Clusters, the Air Commendation Medal.
with three oak leaf clusters, Air Force Combat Readiness Medal, National Defense Service Medals, and, of course, the Korea Defense Service Medal, and it just goes on and on and on, and we're almost running out of time for this show, but let's go on to the next show.
Talk about this.
This is the young and the old Ken Loveless.
Before and after the shot on the left,
This was during World War II.
I might add, I was always fighting the Japanese.
I never fought the Germans because my grandparents were of German stock.
In fact, my great grandpa used to take me around the farm and have me speak German and learn.
And I resisted that.
But I've got my steel helmet on, a wooden rifle, and I've got a parachute.
Now, at the end of the parachute was a cardboard box.
My grandmother would pack my lunch in there.
And I had a kit bag with gear in my left hand.
But anyway, that's when I was, I'd go out and play for hours, throw that parachute up in the air and then run.
So you were about how old in that picture?
That was 40, 44, 43 or 44.
So I would have been four or five years old.
And then on the right,
It was the side of me at the Airborne School at Fort Beans, Georgia.
This is in your home.
We're going to talk about this next show and what you flew in Vietnam.
This is a print of the OH-6 helicopter that you, the attack helicopter.
No, that's the UH-1B.
That's the Huey.
That's the Huey that we used for combat assaults.
Right, right.
And then there's, I found this in the book.
This is three separate helicopters.
This is the OH-6 in the foreground, the Huey in the middle, and then...
I forgot the name of the helicopter.
That's the Cobra on the third one.
Yeah, on the far one.
Just to give folks an idea of the three different helicopters that were in service, and the attack helicopter was the one in the foreground, the one that you... Well, the 086 was an observation type, but we did have a minigun, XM27 subsystem, which was like a Gatling gun.
Right.
And you can't see it here because it would be on the port side of the helicopter.
And I also went down in one of those in Vietnam.
I lost everything from the back of what looks like an egg back was gone.
And I went in and did an art rotation.
Well, in fact, a tail rotor hit me on the leg.
It hit me on the knee.
I had my knee out the door as it was going up in front of me.
But that was really exciting because as soon as I stopped all forward airspeed and let it come down,
I had no control of it after that.
It hopped just like a rabbit would hop.
It hopped to the left three times before I could shut the engine down.
We're going to talk about your service in Vietnam and their memorable missions, and there definitely were, and we're going to do that on the next show because there's just not enough time and 30 minutes to tell your whole story.
So we'll be back next week.
Thank you for being here.
You've probably guessed by now that Ken Loveless's story is one of those that can't be told in 30 minutes.
So next week, we will continue hearing his story of service, the rest of his final Vietnam tour, being the Army Rep to the Royal College of Defense Studies and Battlestaff Commander at Silk Purse in England.
We thank Ken Loveless for his service.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Join Ken Loveless and me next week on Veterans of the Valley.
[Music.]
[Silence.]
In honor of the veterans who have served our country, both past and present,